Computational tools
===================

Access to computers
-------------------

You'll need access to a suitable computer for the implementation
work. If you have your own laptop running Linux (or possibly MacOS)
then you are welcome to use that. It may be possible to do the module
using a Python installation on Windows, but this is a very unsupported
option. For other Department of Mathematics students, the server
``mpe1.ma.ac.uk.uk`` is available for your work on this module and can
be accessed over ssh from anywhere on the Imperial network.

Connecting to ``mpe1`` from a lab machine
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

TBC.

Using your own machine
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you plan to use your own machine for the module, you will need a
basic scientific Python toolchain and the visualisation package
Paraview. On Ubuntu and its relatives, this can be achieved with::

  sudo apt-get install ipython python-scipy python-pytest python-matplotlib paraview

If you wish to use MacOS then please consult the lecturer as we will
have to work through the install for that operating system.

Python
------

Your implementation will be written in Python based on a code skeleton
provided. This means that you'll need a certain familiarity with the
Python language. But don't panic! Python is a very easy language to
work with.

If you haven't done any Python before, then go through `the official
Python tutorial <https://docs.python.org/2/tutorial/index.html>`_. If
you have done a little Python, one feature we will be using a lot is
classes, so if that is new to you you should at least review `the
classes chapter <https://docs.python.org/2/tutorial/classes.html>`_.

The Matlab-like array features of Python are provided by `Numpy
<http://www.numpy.org/>`_ for which there is a `helpful tutorial
<http://wiki.scipy.org/Tentative_NumPy_Tutorial>`_. There is also a
handy `guide for Matlab users
<http://wiki.scipy.org/NumPy_for_Matlab_Users>`_. In that context, the
code provided in this course will always use Numpy arrays, and never
Numpy matrices.

Bitbucket and git
-----------------
